What is machine learning?

Machine learning is the subset of artificial intelligence (AI) focused on algorithms that can “learn” the patterns of training data and, subsequently, make accurateinferencesabout new data. This pattern recognition ability enables machine learning models to make decisions or predictions without explicit, hard-coded instructions.
Machine learning has come to dominate the field of AI: it provides the backbone of most modern AI systems, fromforecastingmodels to autonomous vehicles tolarge language models (LLMs)and othergenerative AItools.
The central premise of machine learning (ML) is that if you optimize a model’s performance on a dataset of tasks that adequately resemble the real-world problems it will be used for—through a process calledmodel training—the model can make accurate predictions on the new data it sees in its ultimate use case.
Training itself is simply a means to an end: generalization, the translation of strong performance on training data to useful results in real-world scenarios, is the fundamental goal of machine learning. In essence, a trained model is applying patterns it learned from training data to infer the correct output for a real-world task: the deployment of anAI modelis therefore calledAI inference.
Deep learning, the subset of machine learning driven by large—or rather, “deep”—artificial neural networks, has emerged over the past few decades as the state-of-the-art AI model architecture across nearly every domain in which AI is used. In contrast to the explicitly defined algorithms of traditional machine learning, deep learning relies on distributed “networks” of mathematical operations that provide an unparalleled ability to learn the intricate nuances of very complex data. Because deep learning requires very large amounts of data and computational resources, its advent has coincided with the escalated importance“big data”andgraphics processing units (GPUs).
The discipline of machine learning is closely intertwined with that ofdata science. In a sense, machine learning can be understood as a collection of algorithms and techniques to automate data analysis and (more importantly) apply learnings from that analysis to the autonomous execution of relevant tasks.
The origin of the term (albeit not the core concept itself) is often attributed to Arthur L. Samuel’s 1959 article in IBM Journal, “Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Checkers.” In the paper’s introduction, Samuel neatly articulates machine learning’s ideal outcome: “a computer can be programmed so that it will learn to play a better game of checkers than can be played by the person who wrote the program.”1
Though “machine learning” and “artificial intelligence” are often used interchangeably, they are not quite synonymous. In short:all machine learning is AI, but not all AI is machine learning.
In the popular imagination, “AI” is usually associated with science fiction—typically through depictions of what’s more properly calledartificial general intelligence (AGI), like HAL 9000 in2001: A Space Odysseyor Ava inEx Machina—or, more recently, withgenerativeAI. But “artificial intelligence” is a catch-all term for any program that can use information to make decisions or predictions without active human involvement.
The most elementary AI systems are a series of if-then-else statements, with rules and logic programmed explicitly by a data scientist.  At the simplest level, even a rudimentary thermostat is a rules-based AI system: when programmed with simple rules like
IF room_temperature < 67, THEN turn_on_heater
and
IF room_temperature > 72, THEN turn_on_air_conditioner
the thermostat is capable of autonomous decision-making without further human intervention. At a more complex level, a large and intricate rules-baseddecision treeprogrammed by medical experts could parse symptoms, circumstances and comorbidities to aid diagnosis or prognosis.2
Unlike in expert systems, the logic by which a machine learning model operates isn’t explicitly programmed—it’slearnedthrough experience. Consider a program that filters email spam: rules-based AI requires a data scientist to manually devise accurate, universal criteria for spam; machine learning requires only the selection of an appropriate algorithm and an adequate dataset of sample emails. In training, the model is shown sample emails and predicts which are spam; the error of its predictions is calculated, and its algorithm is adjusted to reduce error; this process is repeated until the model is accurate. The newly trained ML model hasimplicitlylearned how to identify spam.
As the tasks an AI system is to perform become more complex, rules-based models become increasingly brittle: it’s often impossible to explicitly define every pattern and variable a model must consider. Machine learning systems have emerged as the dominant mode of artificial intelligence because implicit learning patterns from the data itself is inherently more flexible, scalable and accessible.
Stay up to date on the most important—and intriguing—industry trends on AI, automation, data and beyond with the Think Newsletter, delivered twice weekly. See theIBM Privacy Statement.
You are subscribed.
Machine learning works through mathematical logic. The relevant characteristics (or "features") of each data point must therefore be expressed numerically, so that the data itself can be fed into a mathematical algorithm that will "learn" to map a given input to the desired output.
Data points in machine learning are usually represented in vector form, in which each element (or dimension) of a data point’svector embeddingcorresponds to its numerical value for a specific feature. For data modalities that are inherently numerical, such as financial data or geospatial coordinates, this is relatively straightforward. But many data modalities, such as text, images, social media graph data or app user behaviors, are not inherently numerical, and therefore entail less immediately intuitive feature engineering to be expressed in an ML-ready way.
The (often manual) process of choosing which aspects of data to use in machine learning algorithms is calledfeature selection.Feature extractiontechniques refine data down to only its most relevant, meaningful dimensions. Both are subsets offeature engineering, the broader discipline of preprocessing raw data for use in machine learning. One notable distinction of deep learning is that it typically operates on raw data and automates much of the feature engineering—or at least the feature extraction—process. This makes deep learning more scalable, albeit less interpretable, than traditional machine learning.
For a practical example, consider a simplelinear regressionalgorithm for predicting home sale prices based on a weighted combination of three variables: square footage, age of house and number of bedrooms. Each house is represented as a vector embedding with 3 dimensions:[square footage, bedrooms, age]. A 30-year-old house with 4 bedrooms and 1900 square feet could be represented as[1900, 4, 30](though for mathematical purposes those numbers might first be scaled, or normalized, to a more uniform range).
The algorithm is a straightforward mathematical function:
Here,A,BandCare the model parameters: adjusting them will adjust how heavily the model weighs each variable. The goal of machine learning is to find the optimal values for such model parameters: in other words, the parameter values that result in the overall function outputting the most accurate results. While most real-world instances of machine learning involve more complex algorithms with a greater number of input variables, the principle remains the same: optimizing the algorithm's adjustable parameters to yield greater accuracy.
All machine learning methods can be categorized as one of three distinct learning paradigms: supervised learning, unsupervised learning or reinforcement learning, based on the nature of their training objectives and (often but not always) by the type of training data they entail.
Supervised learningtrains a model to predict the “correct” output for a given input. It applies to tasks that require some degree of accuracy relative to some external “ground truth,” such as classification or regression.
Unsupervised learningtrains a model to discern intrinsic patterns, dependencies and correlations in data. Unlike in supervised learning, unsupervised learning tasks don’t involve any external ground truth against which its outputs should be compared.
Reinforcement learning (RL)trains a model to evaluate its environment and take an action that will garner the greatest reward. RL scenarios don’t entail the existence of a singular ground truth, but they do entail the existence of “good” and “bad” (or neutral) actions.
The end-to-end training process for a given model can, and often does, involve hybrid approaches that leverage more than one of these learning paradigms. For instance, unsupervised learning is often used to preprocess data for use in supervised or reinforcement learning. Large language models (LLMs) typically undergo their initial training (pre-training) andfine-tuningthrough variants of supervised learning, followed by more fine-tuning through RL techniques such asreinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF).
In a similar but distinct practice, variousensemble learningmethods aggregate the outputs of multiple algorithms.
Supervised learning algorithms train models for tasks requiring accuracy, such asclassificationor regression. Supervised machine learning powers both state-of-the-art deep learning models and a wide array of traditional ML models still widely employed across industries.
Regressionmodels predict continuous values, such as price, duration, temperature or size. Examples of traditional regression algorithms includelinear regression, polynomial regression andstate space models.
Classificationmodels predict discrete values, such as the category (orclass) a data point belongs to, a binary decision or a specific action to be taken. Examples of traditional classification algorithms includesupport vector machines (SVMs),Naïve Bayesandlogistic regression.
Many supervised ML algorithms can be used for either task. For instance, the output of what’s nominally a regression algorithm can subsequently be used to inform a classification prediction.
To be measured and optimized for accuracy, a model’s outputs must be compared to aground truth: the ideal or “correct” output for any given input. In conventional supervised learning, that ground truth is provided by labeled data. An email spam detection model is trained on a dataset of emails that have each been labeled asSPAMorNOT SPAM. Animage segmentationmodel is trained on images in which every individual pixel has been annotated by its classification. The goal of supervised learning is to adjust the model’s parameters until its outputs consistently match the ground truth provided by those labels.
Essential to supervised learning is the use of aloss functionthat measures the divergence (“loss”) between the model’s output and the ground truth across a batch of training inputs. The objective of supervised learning is defined mathematically asminimizing the output of a loss function. Once loss has been computed, various optimization algorithms—most of which involve calculating thederivative(s) of the loss function—are used to identify parameter adjustments that will reduce loss.
Because this process traditionally requires a human in the loop to provide ground truth in the form of data annotations, it’s called “supervised” learning. As such, the use of labeled data was historically considered the definitive characteristic of supervised learning. But on the most fundamental level, the hallmark of supervised learning is the existence of some ground truth and the training objective of minimizing the output of loss function that measures divergence from it.
To accommodate a more versatile notion of supervised learning, modern ML terminology uses “supervision” or “supervisory signals” to refer generically to any source of ground truth.
Labeling data can become prohibitively costly and time-consuming for complex tasks and large datasets.Self-supervised learningentails training on tasks in which a supervisory signal is obtained directly fromunlabeleddata—hence “self” supervised.
For instance,autoencodersare trained to compress (orencode) input data, then reconstruct (ordecode) the original input using that compressed representation. Their training objective is to minimizereconstruction error, using the original input itself as ground truth. Self-supervised learning is also the primary training method for LLMs: models are provided text samples with certain words hidden or masked and tasked with predicting the missing words.
Self-supervised learning is frequently associated withtransfer learning, as it can providefoundation modelswith broad capabilities that will then befine-tunedfor more specific tasks.
Whereas self-supervised learning is essentially supervised learning on unlabeled data,semi-supervised learningmethods use both labeled data and unlabeled data. Broadly speaking, semi-supervised learning comprises techniques that use information from the available labeled data to make assumptions about the unlabeled data points so that the latter can be incorporated into supervised learning workflows.
Unsupervised machine learning algorithms discern intrinsic patterns in unlabeled data, such as similarities, correlations or potential groupings. They’re most useful in scenarios where such patterns aren’t necessarily apparent to human observers. Because unsupervised learning doesn’t assume the preexistence of a known “correct” output, they don’t require supervisory signals or conventional loss functions—hence “unsupervised.”
Most unsupervised learning methods perform one of the following functions:
Clusteringalgorithms partition unlabeled data points into “clusters,” or groupings, based on their proximity or similarity to one another. They’re typically used for tasks like market segmentation or fraud detection. Prominent clustering algorithms include K-means clustering, Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) and density-based methods such as DBSCAN.
Associationalgorithms discern correlations, such as between a particular action and certain conditions. For instance, e-commerce businesses such as Amazon use unsupervisedassociationmodels to power recommendation engines.
Dimensionality reductionalgorithms reduce the complexity of data points by representing them with a smaller number of features—that is, in fewer dimensions—whilepreserving their meaningful characteristics. They’re often used for preprocessing data, as well as for tasks such as data compression or data visualization. Prominent dimensionality reduction algorithms includeautoencoders,principal component analysis (PCA),linear discriminant analysis (LDA)andt-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE).
As their name suggests, unsupervised learning algorithms can be broadly understood as somewhat “optimizing themselves.” For example,this animationdemonstrates how a k-means clustering algorithm iteratively optimizes the centroid of each cluster on its own. The challenge of training unsupervised models therefore focuses on effective data preprocessing and properlytuning hyperparametersthat influence the learning process but are not themselves learnable, such as thelearning rateor number of clusters.
Whereas supervised learning trains models by optimizing them to match ideal exemplars and unsupervised learning algorithms fit themselves to a dataset,reinforcement learningmodels are trained holistically through trial and error. They’re used prominently in robotics, video games,reasoning modelsand other use cases in which the space of possible solutions and approaches are particularly large, open-ended or difficult to define. In RL literature, an AI system is often referred to as an “agent.”
Rather than the independent pairs of input-output data used in supervised learning, reinforcement learning (RL) operates on interdependent state-action-reward data tuples. Instead of minimizing error, the objective of reinforcement learning is optimizing parameters to maximize reward.
A mathematical framework for reinforcement learning is built primarily on the following components:
Thestate spacecontains all available information relevant to decisions that the model might make. The state typically changes with each action that the model takes.
Theaction spacecontains all the decisions that the model is permitted to make at a moment. In a board game, for instance, the action space comprises all legal moves available at a given time. In text generation, the action space comprises the entire “vocabulary” of tokens available to an LLM.
Thereward signalis the feedback—positive or negative, typically expressed as a scalar value—provided to the agent as a result of each action. The value of the reward signal could be determined by explicit rules, by a reward function, or by a separately trainedreward model.
Apolicyis the “thought process” that drives an RL agent’s behavior. Mathematically speaking, a policy (π) is a function that takes a state (s) as input and returns an action (a):   π(s)→a .
Inpolicy-basedRL methods like proximal policy optimization (PPO), the model learns a policy directly. Invalue-basedmethods like Q-learning, the agent learns a value function that computes a score for how “good” each state is, then chooses actions that lead to higher-value states. Consider a maze: a policy-based agent might learn “at this corner, turn left,” while a value-based agent learns a score for each position and simply moves to an adjacent position with a better score. Hybrid approaches, such as actor-critic methods, learn a value function that’s then used to optimize a policy.
In deep reinforcement learning, the policy is represented as aneural network.
Deep learningemploysartificial neural networkswith many layers—hence “deep”—rather than the explicitly designed algorithms of traditional machine learning. Though neural networks were introduced early in the history of machine learning, it wasn’t until the late 2000s and early 2010s, enabled in part by advancements inGPUs, that they became dominant in most subfields of AI.
Loosely inspired by the human brain, neural networks comprise interconnected layers of “neurons” (ornodes), each of which performs its own mathematical operation (called an “activation function”). The output of each node’s activation function serves as input to each of the nodes of the following layer and so on until the final layer, where the network’s final output is computed. Crucially, the activation functions performed at each node arenonlinear, enabling neural networks to model complex patterns and dependencies.
Each connection between two neurons is assigned a uniqueweight: a multiplier that increases or decreases one neuron’s contribution to a neuron in the following layer. These weights, along with uniquebiasterms added to each neuron's activation function, are the parameters to be optimized through machine learning.
Thebackpropagationalgorithm enables the computation of howeach individual nodecontributes to the overall output of the loss function, allowing even millions or billions of model weights to be individually optimized throughgradient descentalgorithms. Because of the volume and granularity of updates required to achieve optimal results, deep learning requires very large amounts of data and computational resources compared to traditional ML.That distributed structure affords deep learning models their incredible power and versatility. Imagine training data as data points scattered on a 2-dimensional graph. Essentially, traditional machine learning aims to find a single curve that runs through every one of those data points; deep learning pieces together an arbitrary number of smaller, individually adjustable lines to form the desired shape. Neural networks areuniversal approximators: it has been theoretically proven that for any function, there exists a neural network arrangement that can reproduce it.3, 4
Having said that, just because something istheoreticallypossible doesn’t mean it’s practically achievable through existing training methods. For many years, adequate performance on certain tasks remained out of reach even for deep learning models—but over time, modifications to the standard neural network architecture have unlocked new capabilities for ML models.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs)addconvolutional layersto neural networks. In mathematics, a convolution is an operation where one function modifies (orconvolves) the shape of another. In CNNs, convolutional layers are used to extract important features from data byapplying weighted “filters”.CNNs are primarily associated with computer vision models and image data, but have a number of other important use cases.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs)are designed to work on sequential data. Whereas conventional feedforward neural networks map a single input to a single output, RNNs map asequenceof inputs to an output by operating in a recurrent loop in which the output for a given step in the input sequence serves as input to the computation for the following step. In effect this creates an internal “memory,” called thehidden state, that allows RNNs to understand context and order.
Transformer models, first introduced in 2017, are largely responsible for the advent of LLMs and other pillars of generative AI, achieving state-of-the-art results across most subdomains of machine learning. Like RNNs, transformers are ostensibly designed for sequential data, but clever workarounds have enabled most data modalities to be processed by transformers. The unique strength of transformer models comes from their innovativeattention mechanism, which enables the models to selectively focus on the parts of the input data most relevant at a specific moment in a sequence.
Mamba modelsare a relatively new neural network architecture, first introduced in 2023, based on a unique variation ofstate space models (SSMs). Like transformers, Mamba models provide an innovative means of selectively prioritizing the most relevant information at a given moment. Mamba has recently emerged as a rival to the transformer architecture, particularly for LLMs.
Most applications of machine learning fall into one or more of the following categories, which are defined primarily by their use cases and the data modalities they operate upon.
Computer vision is the subdomain of AI concerned with image data, video data other data modalities that require a model or machine to “see,” from healthcare diagnostics to facial recognition to self-driving cars. Notable subfields of computer vision include image classification,object detection,image segmentationandoptical character recognition (OCR).
The field ofnatural language processing (NLP)spans a diverse array of tasks concerning text, speech and other language data. Notable subdomains of NLP includechatbots,speech recognition,language translation,sentiment analysis,text generation,summarizationandAI agents. In modern NLP, large language models continue to advance the state of the art at an unprecedented pace.
Time series modelsare applied anomaly detection, market analysis and related pattern recognition or prediction tasks. They use machine learning on historical data for a variety of forecasting use cases.
Diffusion models,variational autoencoders (VAEs)andgenerative adversarial networks (GANs)can be used to generate original images that apply pixel patterns learned from training data.
Join our world-class panel of engineers, researchers, product leaders and more as they cut through the AI noise to bring you the latest in AI news and insights.
Machine learning operations (MLOps)is a set of practices for implementing an assembly line approach to building, deploying and maintaining machine learning models.
Careful curation and preprocessing of training data, as well as appropriatemodel selection, are crucial steps in the MLOps pipeline. Thoughtful post-training validation, from the design of benchmark datasets to the prioritization of particular performancemetrics, is necessary to ensure that a model generalizes well (and isn’t justoverfittingthe training data).
Following deployment, models must be monitored formodel drift, inference efficiency issues and other adverse developments. A well-defined practice ofmodel governanceis essential to continued efficacy, especially in regulated or fast-changing industries.
A number of open source tools, libraries and frameworks exist for building, training and testing machine learning projects. While such libraries offer an array of pre-configured modules and abstractions to streamline the process of building ML-based models and workflows, practitioners will need to familiarize themselves with commonly used programming languages—particularlyPython—to make full use of them.
Prominent open source libraries, particularly for building deep learning models, includePyTorch,TensorFlow, Keras and the Hugging Face Transformers library.
Notable open sourcemachine learning librariesand toolkits focused on traditional ML include Pandas,Scikit-learn,XGBoost,Matplotlib, SciPy and NumPy among many others.
IBM itself maintains and updates a significant library oftutorialsfor beginners and advanced ML practitioners alike.
Follow Techsplainers:SpotifyandApple Podcasts
Senior Staff Writer, AI Models
IBM Think
